Developer documentation about reports (#2908)
minvws/nl-kat-coordination: docs/source/developer_documentation/reports.md

# Technical Report Documentation

## Creating reports
### Location of the report code
The code of the reports is located inside the `rocky` folder.

### Steps to create a new report
Make sure rocky is running so you can see the changes you are about to make.

1.	Navigate to the `report_types` folder that contains all the different report types.

> 2.	Create a new folder with a descriptive name ending with `_report`. Alternatively, you can duplicate an existing folder, modify the names, and clear its contents. (If you’ve done this, continue to step 3.)

Reviewer: report naming ending with _report not needed per se

Author: All existing reports end with “_reports.” Wouldn't it be better for consistency and readability to write it that way?

3.	Inside the new folder, create the following files: `__init__.py`, `report.html`, and `report.py`.
4.	Define a class within `report.py` with the name of your report and include the following variables:
```
class YourNameReport(Report):
    # The id of your report:
    id = "your-name-report"
    # The name users will see:
    name = _("Your Name Report")
    description = _("Give a description to your new report.")
    # All the required and optional plugins (can be empty lists):
    plugins = {"required": ["nmap"], "optional": ["shodan", "nmap-udp", "nmap-ports", "nmap-ip-range"]}
    # The OOI types that can serve as input to generate this report:
    input_ooi_types = {Hostname, IPAddressV4, IPAddressV6}
    # Path of report.html:

>     template_path = "your_name_report/report.html"

Reviewer: your_report_name

```
5.	Open `reports/report_types/helpers.py` and add your new class to the `REPORTS` constant list.

> 6.	Implement a method within `report.py` to gather the required data for report generation. This data can be used in `report.html`. See the “Collecting data” section for more information.

Reviewer: We should explain how to use the data in the html

7.	Design the HTML structure for your report within `report.html`.
8.	Save your changes and refresh the page to see the changes you made immediately.

> ### Collecting data

Reviewer: We should explain the difference between generate_data and the possibility to optimize using the collect_data method

Use all existing reports as examples to gather data for your report.
- In the file `rocky/reports/report_types/definitions.py` you can find some methods that may  be useful.
- For querying data from Octopoes, consult `octopoes/octopoes/connector/octopoes.py` which contains various useful methods. Additional information on how to write queries can be found [here](https://docs.openkat.nl/developer_documentation/octopoes.html#querying).

## Writing report unit tests
### Purpose of unit testing
Unit tests validate whether the output of your newly created report matches the expected results. To do this, you need to recreate the report using mocked data.

### Steps for writing unit tests

> 1.	Create a new test file within `tests/reports` with the name of your report, starting with `test_` and ending with `_report.py`.

Reviewer: again, the _report not needed per se.

Reviewer 2: While strictly it isn't necessary, I recommend using the `_report` suffix. Because most classes that are being tested do end with `Report`. And besides that, there could be other tests that tests the report app/ module, and those would be harder to distinguish without the suffix.

```
class YourNameReport(Report):
    # The id of your report:
    id = "your_report_name"
    # The name users will see:
    name = _("Your Report Name")
    description = _("Give a description to your new report.")
    # All the required and optional plugins (can be empty lists):
    plugins = {"required": ["nmap"], "optional": ["shodan", "nmap-udp", "nmap-ports", "nmap-ip-range"]}
    # The OOI types that can serve as input to generate this report:
    input_ooi_types = {Hostname, IPAddressV4, IPAddressV6}
    # Path of report.html:
    template_path = "your_report_name/report.html"
```
5.	Open `reports/report_types/helpers.py` and add your new class to the `REPORTS` constant list.
6.	Implement a method within `report.py` to gather the required data for report generation. See the [Collecting data](#collecting-data) section for more information.
7.	Design the HTML structure for your report within `report.html`. The generated data from `report.py` can be used with Django Template in this file. For example by referring to the returned value like `{{ data }}`.
8.	Save your changes and refresh the page to see the changes you made immediately.

### Collecting data

> There are two ways to collect data:
> - Create a method called `collect_data` and use the `self.octopoes_api_connector.query_many()` method to data for multiple OOIs at the same time. This can reduce the number of queries to Octopoes, which is better for report performance.
> - Create a method called `generate_data`. This method is the old way of receiving the data from Octopoes. It is less efficient and therefore should only be used with `self.octopoes_api_connector.get_tree()` to collect data from a tree.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should keep two ways to do this, the two ways only exist because some reports still need to be changed to `collect_data`. `get_tree` can be used in `collect_data`, it is just less efficient because we need to do call for every OOI.

```suggestion
Data collection happens in the `collect_data` method that the report class should implement. Using the `self.octopoes_api_connector.query_many()` method data for multiple OOIs can be requested in one call. This is better for performance and is the preferred way to fetch data. Methods such as  `self.octopoes_api_connector.get_tree()` that work on a single OOI should only used if the multiple OOI methods don't provide the data that is needed.

The `generate_data` method only works on single OOIs and should not be used in new reports. As soon as the existing reports that implement `generate_data` have been moved over to `collect_data` suppor for `generate_data` will be removed.
```

- For querying data from Octopoes, consult `octopoes/octopoes/connector/octopoes.py` which contains various useful methods. Additional information on how to write queries can be found [here](https://docs.openkat.nl/developer_documentation/octopoes.html#querying).

## Writing report unit tests
### Purpose of unit testing
Unit tests validate whether the output of your newly created report matches the expected results. To do this, you need to recreate the report using mocked data.

### Steps for writing unit tests
1.	Create a new test file within `tests/reports` with the name of your report, starting with `test_` and ending with `_report.py`.
2.	Inside this file, create at least one function with the name of your test, starting with `test_your_report_name_`, followed by a description of the test. Try to create different tests to cover various scenarios, such as:
    - Empty list returned from the Octopoes query.
    - Single value returned from the Octopoes query.
    - Multiple values returned from the Octopoes query.
3.	Write the test within this function. The unit test consist out of multiple parts:

>     - **Mocking data:**  Add mocked data to `rocky/tests/conftest.py`. Adding `@pytest.fixture` above the function makes it callable from within your test. Make sure to return a value. In your test file, define the mocked data. Call the `mock_octopoes_api_connector` and tell him which input should return which output.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Mocking data:**  Add mocked data to `rocky/tests/conftest.py` as pytest fixture using `@pytest.fixture`. Pytest fixture are automatically injected if you add the name of the fixture as argument to the test function.  Make sure to return a value in the fixture. In your test file, define the mocked data. Set the `oois` and `queries` attributes of  the  `mock_octopoes_api_connector` to the input that the mock should be return.
```
